Report on Implementing the UM system
described in Quilici's "Forming User Models"

September 3, 1997
David Pautler

I. Changes in Representation

       (_not-desirable ?e) is now (_is-desired (NOT ?e))
      (_prevents_ ?e1 ?e2) is now (_has-result_ ?e1 (NOT ?e2))
(_not-results-in_ ?e1 ?e2) is now (NOT (_has-result ?e1 ?e2))
  (_not-prevents_ ?e1 ?e2) is now (NOT (_has-result_ ?e1 (NOT ?e2)))

(not-exists_where_ ?plan (?constraint1 AND ?constraint2))
is now (NOT (?constraint1 AND ?constraint2)) where ?c1 and ?c2
can be assumed to mention ?plan already.
This new NOT clause is usually satisfied by 'negation by failure'
(a variant of the Closed World Assumption); that is, an attempt is
made to prove the propo within the NOT, and if the attempt fails
the whole NOT propo is assumed to be true.

Some rules had mentioned P and P', indicating that the bindings of
these two variables should not be allowed to corefer.  This restriction
has been implemented as a NOT= predicate that has an attached procedure
(which in turn adds to whatever noncodesignation "alist" of bindings it
was passed).

As an example of how all these changes work together, consider how
ER-9 was changed from:

((_is-best-plan-for_ ?P ?G) <-
 ((_results-in_ ?P ?G) AND
  ((_not-results-in_ ?P ?E) AND
   ((_not-desirable ?E) AND
    (not-exists_where_ ?P2 ((_results-in_ ?P2 ?G) AND
                            (_not-results-in_ ?P2 ?E) ))))))
to:
((_is-best-plan-for_ ?P ?G) <-
 ((_has-result_ ?P ?G) AND
  ((NOT (_has-result_ ?P ?Side-effect)) AND
   ((_is-desired (NOT ?Side-effect)) AND
    (NOT ((NOT= ?P2 ?P1) AND
          ((_has-result_ ?P2 ?G) AND
           (NOT (_has-result_ ?P2 ?Side-effect)) )))))))
           
This new form subsumes both the old ER-9 and the old ER-12 (which used
'_prevents_').  Six of the 30 rules were subsumed by new versions

(Also, it appears that the original 30 did not cover all logical
possibilities -- there are more 'results' rules than 'enables' rules,
for example).


II. Changes in Data Structures

It's not clear whether the old structures used backptrs or not, but the
new version does.  One way or another, we need to be able to get from
the propos representing antecedents and consequents back to the rules
which 'contain' them (to establish a focus space path, for example).

The original writeup mentions 'contradicts', 'shared', 'explains', and
'instance' links.  It's not clear whether those links are simple ptrs
or special data structures, but I have implemented them as ptrs (except
that I don't use 'shared' links at all, the 'explains' link is implemented
as a data structure for rules, and 'instance' is actually a combination of
an 'instance-of' ptr on one belief and an 'instances' list on the belief
pointed to).  Each propo, whether fact, antecedent, or consequent, is
embedded in a 'node' (or "belief") structure that has fields for
'propo', 'container', 'instance-of', 'instances', and 'contradicts'.
For antecedents and consequents, the 'container' field points to the
embedding rule.  Rules have two fields, 'antes' and 'conseqs', which are
both lists of nodes.


III. Changes in the Rule Base

The original writeup said that there were instantiated rules in the KB
from the start, and that the system would try to reuse these.  The current
implementation has no instantiated rules in the rule base, and even when
it does instantiate a rule the rule is not added to the rule base (but its
antes and conseqs are added to the advisor and user models, and since the
'container' ptr maintains a connection to the whole rule, the whole rule
is still accessible from those models).

I suspect that a special marker was used to indicate which of the antes
of an instantiated rule should be mentioned as a "supporting argument"
for advisor recommendations.  It's not clear from the original writeup
how to compute these supporting arguments, and the current implementation
doesn't have a solution of its own.

Also, there are very few beliefs in the advisor model that compare plans
as "better" or "best".  The few that are present have been added to make
scoring work as expected for the example.  (This lack of comparative
beliefs is one consequence of not having instantiated rules in the KB.)


IV. Changes in Procedures

A. Clarification: Following tradition in AI, any (and only) input propos
   that contain variables are assumed to represent user queries, instead of
   user statements about universals (e.g., "All plans are best for removing
   files").  Input propos that contain no vars are assumed to be user comments,
   instead of user queries about the truth of an instantiated belief.
	
B. Changes to the algorithm description given on p. 31:
   1. In step 3, change "negation of advisor belief" to "contradiction
      of advisor belief in the focus space" (also change "beliefs in the
      user model" to "user beliefs in the focus space").
   2. In step 4, it's suggested that all the antecedents of a rule must
      be supported before the rule is added to list S; actually, an attempt
      is made to support each one, but support isn't essential; the purpose
      of finding support is to instantiate the rule as much as possible;
      any unsupported antes will be added to the user model as assumptions.
   3. In step 5, it's suggested again that all antes must be supported, but
      again all that's needed for instantiation is a 'good faith effort'.
   4. In step 6, it's not necessary to weed any rules after setting U=S+F.
      Previous steps already did the necessary weeding, and it is impossible
      to get some of the other cases mentioned in this step (if you really
      followed the algorithm).
   
C. The scoring example on p. 35 can be confusing.  Here's my attempt at a
   clarification.
   1. The 'coupling factor' is the percentage of antes and conseqs ("beliefs")
      in the candidate explanation that match something in the *user* model,
      not the whole dialog model as stated in the paper (the 'agreement
      factor' is the percentage matching the advisor model, so using the
      whole dialog model for the coupling factor would involve double-counting).
   2. At the start of a session, the user model is empty, so any beliefs
      that count toward the coupling factor must be either explicit user
      comments or uncontested advisor beliefs added as assumptions to the user
      model.  This points out an error in the example -- the 'more desirable'
      belief is neither a user comment nor part of a previous explanation, so
      it can't really be in the user model right now, and thus can't count
      toward the coupling factor.

D. Later parts of the algorithm described in the body of the paper
   1. After you have a rule connecting user input to something in the focus
      space, push-new the antecedents of that rule as (assumed) user beliefs
      into the focus space.
   2. While generating a response:
      a) The user's portion of the focus space is reset to NIL only when
         the advisor picks out a mistake in the user's reasoning or the
         advisor gives a justification for a previous comment of his.  The
         other kind of response, providing an alternate recommendation,
         jumps past whatever the user just said to the original user query
         in connecting itself to the dialog model, so resetting the user's
         part of the focus space would eliminate the opportunity to check
         which of the advisor's last statements were uncontested and thus
         acceptable as additions to the user model in the next few steps.
      b) The original writeup says that only responses that have not been
         given before are returned.  It's not clear whether the context of
         the response was important in determining whether it could be given
         again.  The current implementation does not check whether a response
         has been given before.
   3. Although the response is what is returned by the overall system,
      some bookkeeping is done between determining the response and returning
      it.  This bookkeeping involves updating the focus space and
      updating the user model.  It involves these steps:
      a) Reset the advisor's part of the focus space to NIL.
      b) The response will always be a conseq node; take an ante of the same
         instantiated rule as a starting point for a path toward the node
         representing the user's query, which will cross rule structures,
         'contradicts' links, and 'instance-of' links.  You'll be starting
         on the advisor's side of the focus-space-to-be-constructed.
         (See 'update-focus-spaces' in 'quil1.lsp' for algorithm.)
      c) If the user just made a comment rather than a query, consider all
         the beliefs in *old-advisor-focus-space* (the last thing the advisor
         said + support for it) for inclusion in the user model.  Any advisor
         belief that doesn't contradict something in the user's focus space
         (indicated by a 'contradicts' ptr or by calling 'contradiction-p'),
         or that isn't a conseq of a rule with an antecedent that contradicts,
         should be added to the user model.  For example, given user focus
         space (U0 !U1 U2) and *old-advisor-focus-space* (!U0 U1 B1 B2 B3 B4
         B5 B6 B7) from instantiated rule(s) (!U0+B1->B2) and (B3+B4->U1) and
         (B5+B6->B7), you should add only (B1 B3 B4 B5 B6 B7) to the user
         model (although B3 and B4 are questionable).
         We have not considered whether such things as supports for B1 or
         conclusions from B7 should also be added to the user model, or
         whether conclusions from B2 should be excluded.
      d) Push-new all beliefs in the user's focus space into the user model.
      e) Push-new all beliefs in the advisor's focus space into the advisor
         model unless these beliefs are part of an alternate recommendation
         (which the advisor doesn't really believe is "better" or "best").
      f) Set *old-advisor-focus-space* to the current advisor focus space so
         you won't lose it when you reset the advisor's focus space in (a),
         construct a new one in (b) but then need the old one in (c).
         
Additions 9/18/97

1) Because the explanations in S and F do not have to be completely
   supported, there may be some antecedents with uninstantiated vars.
   I've added a 1/(1+ num-uninstand-vars) multiplier to the scoring fn.

2) A syntactic rule was coming up as the favored explanation for user
   comment (1-5), so I have restricted the search for explanations to
   non-syntactic rules, although the full set of rules is available as
   potential supports once a set of candidate explanations is formed.
   
   An example of a syntactic rule is:
   
   (_is-desired (NOT (NOT ?e))) <- (_is-desired ?e)
   
   I added all the syntactic rules myself, as part of conflating several
   of the old rules into single rules, so this doesn't affect the
   original knowledge base.
   
3) I've added a search depth bound of 2 levels for backchaining, because
   that's all we appear to use, and search was going in silly directions.
   
4) There appears to be an error in the explanation algorithm in that if
   the highest scoring explanation is not in S, then S is thrown away
   and not included in the candidate rankings when the chains in F are
   extended by one link.  I now keep track of old Ss and their scores.
   
5) Also, when the consequents of candidates in F are used to grow those
   chains so that they might eventually connect to the advisor focus space,
   the scores for those candidates were being dumped so that a chain was
   being scored only on its latest link.  My first attempted fix of this
   was to keep the old scores and add new scores to them, but adding isn't
   the right fn because it only makes scores bigger and longer chains are
   not necessarily better explanations (often, the opposite).  It now seems
   that the best solution is to keep the components of the old score so that
   the TOTAL number of couplings in the chain can be divided by the TOTAL
   number of antecedents in the chain, and similarly for agreements and
   uninstantiated vars.  This solution is now implemented.
   
6) The explanation algorithm says that one of the two kinds of explanations
   is to connect user input to something in the user focus space (something
   the user previously said or we inferred from what he said).  The rationale
   for this was the idea that users might try to justify one comment with
   a later comment.  However, this has caused a problem when trying to
   explain (1-5) because I was getting several explanations relating
   "don't want to fill up /tmp" to "don't want to be asked before file removed",
   and these explanations were scoring the same as the explanation we
   really want.  I don't allow this kind of explanation anymore.
   
END OF REPORT
